---
layout:     post
title:      Understanding the KISS principle
date:       2015-08-23 23:40:00
categories: software
tags:       opinion kiss yagni pattern complex complicated devops
icon:       comments
summary: >
            KISS stands for "Keep It Simple Stupid", it is a kind of design rule 
            which states simplicity over complexity to avoid creating systems 
            difficult to understand and maintain, but what is the meaning of 
            complicated? what is the limit to say that something is complex?  
---

KISS stands for ["Keep It Simple Stupid" -no comma, no offense :-)][KISS] it is a 
kind of design rule which states simplicity over complexity to avoid creating 
systems difficult to understand and maintain. I am a big fan of this principle, 
but from time to time I have discussions with people about how to apply it in 
software systems. It seems to me, as always, is a terminology issue between: 
simple, complex, complicated and difficult. And, as it involves people, it 
always gets controversial and complicated.


Everybody, more or less, knows the meaning of **simple -something easy to 
understand-**, but, what is the meaning of complicated? and, what about complex?. 
The difference is how one can understand, replicate or predict the behaviour of 
such as system. A **complicated system can be divided into small parts**, by 
understanding each part and the interactions with others, one can understand the 
complete system. Difficult has nothing to do with those terms, it is a 
qualitative attribute which depends on the knowledge of each person. But, in 
general, we can admit that something **complex implies some kind of difficulty**, 
but something complicated not implies something (directly) difficult per se, it 
only implies that it has other pieces and it needs to pay more attention.


As engineers, we are always developing processes and algorithms to transform 
data into information, and I like getting some inspiration from the nature, 
lets do it. Along time, iteration after iteration (evolution), it has faced 
similar problems that we have in our systems and most of the times, we only 
need to have a look about how they were solved.

{% include figure.html href="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light-dependent_reaction" url="/blog/img/Light-dependent_reaction.png" caption="Light-dependent reaction of photosynthesis (from Wikipedia)" description="Light dependent reaction" %}

Let us take a difficult to understand process of nature as the photosynthesis. 
It is the process that most of the plants use go get energy from the light and 
transform it. At a first glance, photosynthesis is a really complex process: it 
involves chemical reactions between molecules, electrons, photons ... so, to 
fully understand the workflow, you have to know, not only biology, but also 
quantum physics. Actually we know, it is one of the most efficient processes 
to get energy from the light, but, is it complex in reality? I do not think so: 
it is efficient, repeatable and stable, resilient and scientifics have defined 
the process. For a person with no knowledge about those subjects -like myself-, 
it is complex, thus really difficult to understand. On the other hand, 
paradoxically, climate is a complex process, I can make some short-term 
predictions (hours). There are models to try to make mid-term predictions, but 
nobody has an algorithm to do it, because it has a lot of unknown variables (it 
is a chaotic system). It is more than difficult to analyze and replicate, 
thus no deterministic.


**Complicated systems should be predictable** in the same way that a watch is 
deterministic. An algorithm cannot be complex, only complicated (ofc some of them 
produce complex results ... but on purpose ... see [genetic algorithms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_algorithm). 
In my opinion, that is the main quality to design resilient systems. 
It is a balance, one has to understand the requirements, analize the problem 
and define a solution, iteration by iteration to improve other qualities like 
performance, security, etc. Unfortunately in reality most of the times is not 
possible creating simple systems, and reaching the point of complicated systems 
is when a good engineer makes the difference with qualities that are difficult 
to explain: experience, flexibility, elegance ... avoiding other risks like 
over-engineering and keeping simple for the end users.


And then, [YAGNI "You aren't gonna need it"][YAGNI] comes up ... but I think it 
deserves another post about that. I would say that a YAGNI focused 
approach can clash with ideas like patterns, design ... specially if
it is not reasonable. The concept was created for [eXtreme Programming][XP] 
methodologies to stop developers doing things that customers will not need, so, 
the first question should be: is this idea applicable to your case?. A good
rule is: be rationale, set priorities, short-term and long-term requirements and reach
agreements with developers. Remember what Einstein said: "*Everything should be 
made as simple as possible, but not simpler*".

Anyway, chaos is beautiful and I will leave for other day the meaning of elegance ... :-)


[KISS]: http://example.com/longish/path/to/resource/here "Keep It Simple Stupid"
[YAGNI]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_aren%27t_gonna_need_it "You aren't gonna need it"
[XP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extreme_programming "Extreme Programming"
