---
layout:     post
title:      Bosh
date:       2016-06-16 23:57:39
categories: bosh
tags:       opinion bosh cloudfoundry
icon:       cloud
summary: >
            And then BOSH came to the stage. BOSH is an open source tool 
            for release engineering, deployment, lifecycle management, 
            and monitoring of distributed systems. Why I have embraced it?
---

The art of provisioning systems is the past, nowadays is time for the Cloud 
architectures, where everything should be as ephemeral as possible, with the 
exception of the data. Those wars between sysadmins about who has the system 
with more uptime are gone (fortunately). The systems should be replicable and 
if one needs and update, just recreate it, it is said that is not a pet. Of 
course, there are always special use cases, but ephemeral is the philosophy of 
the Cloud.


First was automation ...
------------------------


During last years of my career I have tried different provisioning and 
configuration management systems. First, promoted by my former colleague Hector, 
we tried Puppet (in AIX, more than 4 years ago ... early versions, having to 
compile everything in AIX ...) but the fact of having most of the tasks 
automated was amazing. When I joined Springer, I learnt Chef because it was the 
tool which they were using, but honestly, I have never been convinced about Chef 
and I had the feeling that is one step behind Puppet. Then we decided to give a 
try to Ansible, which is becoming more an more mature. Chef and Ansible are 
more oriented to tasks, Puppet is oriented to states. To manage tasks and 
different heterogeneus systems (like those which can be found in big companies) 
I prefer Ansible because of it simplicity and for the rest of use cases where 
Ansible is not suitable, Puppet is better . I have not tried SaltStack, Fabric, 
and other but I think all those tools are based on the same idea: taking care 
of servers (VMs or bare-metal).


... and then BOSH came to the stage
-----------------------------------

When were trying [Cloud Foundry](https://www.cloudfoundry.org/), first we tried 
Chef (yes, there were a way to install CF with Chef!) and then Simon decided to 
give a try to a tool called (micro)BOSH. In the beginning was not easy: no 
documentation, bugs, ... the learning curve was hard, getting used to its way of 
working took time and sometimes frustration. But, with each new CF release, Bosh 
was there in charge of upgrading the platform, with every new BOSH releases came
more features, more documentation, more community. Then I embraced Bosh. Now, I
cannot imagine how to to manage a platform like CF with a different tool.


{% include figure.html href="http://bosh.io" url="/blog/img/bosh.png" caption="BOSH" description="BOSH is an open source tool chain for release engineering, deployment and lifecycle management of large scale distributed services" %}


In the last months, I made some Bosh releases and now I am programming a CPI for
Ironic (OpenStack bare metal provisioning). I do not want to go back to 
traditional provisioning tools. For me, all of those provisioning systems 
are like going back to the past, to the horrible world of trying to 
maintain/manage/control VMs. They are focused on VM's, not on building 
services, and in my opinion, that is the main reason why they are not suitable 
for Cloud architectures. After discovering Bosh everything else seems spaghetti
code to me. Bosh abstracts the infrastructure to help me focusing on 
the architecture of the services, I do not care about VMs. It is the only tool 
I know which does checks/validation and manages the entire life-cyle of the 
components of a service. The VMs are just the needed evil for Bosh. 
If I decide to migrate a service to another infrastructure 
(AWS/OpenSTack/CloudStack ...) I do not need to change anything regarding the
service (only DNS, IPs, VM types and those other things regarding the new
infrastructure). Moreover, with the new BOSH 2.0 manifest style is even easier
that before: the manifest (configuration settings of the service) can be
exactly the same on different infrastructures because their specific parameters
will be in cloudconfig manifest, so no more YAML merging tools! An operator 
will maintain the service running in OpenStack in the same way they were doing
in VSphere. Forget about how to recover the previous release of your service; 
forget about scaling out, about integrated DNS, about bastion hosts for ssh 
connections; forget about unresponsive VMs and where is the persistent data ...

I know Bosh is an opinionated tool, but I think nobody should give an opinion 
about it without giving a try to manage services with it. It is not about 
reading other's opinion on the Internet (like this one), most of those are old 
complains about how difficult was starting with BOSH and creating releases. 
There are documentation and examples in [bosh.io](http://bosh.io), a lot of 
[releases are being created by the community](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-community?utf8=%E2%9C%93&query=boshrelease); 
just take one, spend one week trying it and I hope you will see why I think 
this tool's philosophy is the future: Nobody wants to maintain VMs. 
People want building services and Puppet/Chef/Ansible/... are just different 
implementation about the same idea. New approaches like Bosh, Kubernetes, etc ... 
will evolve and become some kind of standards (I do not know if the tools 
itself will remain, but for sure the idea), because they do not care about 
VMs (or containers): they are focused on services. For everything else there 
is Ansible :-)
